# Cantor's Diagonalization Method

**Theorem 1.6.1.** *The open interval $(0, 1) = \{ x \in \mathbb{R} : 0 < x < 1 \}$ is uncountable.*

**Exercise 1.6.3.** Supply rebuttals to the following complaints about the proof of Theorem 1.6.1
(a) Every rational number has a decimal expansion, so we could apply this same argument to show that the set of rational number between $0$ and $1$ is uncountable. However, because we know that any subset of $\mathbb{Q}$ must be countable, the proof of Theorem 1.6.1 must be flawed.

(b) Some numbers have *two* different decimal representations. Specifically, and decimal expansion that terminates can also be written with repeating $9$'s. For instance, $1/2$ can be written as $0.5$ or as $0.4999\dots$ Doesn't this cause some problem?

---
**Exercise 1.6.4.** Let $S$ be the set consisting of all sequences of $0$'s and $1$'s. Observe that $S$ is not a particular sequence, but rather a large set whose elements are sequences; namely,

$$S = \{ (a_1, a_2, a_3, \dots) : a_n = 0 \, \text{or} \, 1 \}.$$

As an example, the sequence $(1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, \dots)$ is an element of $S$, as is the sequence $(1, 1, 1, 1, 1, \dots)$.

Give a rigorous argument showing that $S$ is uncountable.

**Proof:** We will prove that $S$ is uncountable by contradiction. Assume, for the sake of contradiction, that $S$ is countable. Then there exists an enumeration of all elements of $S$ as sequences $s_1, s_2, s_3, \dots$
Write each sequence as

$$\begin{align*}
s_1 &= (a_{11}, a_{12}, a_{13}, a_{14}, a_{15}, \dots ) \\
s_2 &= (a_{21}, a_{22}, a_{23}, a_{24}, a_{25}, \dots ) \\
s_3 &= (a_{31}, a_{32}, a_{33}, a_{34}, a_{35}, \dots ) \\
s_4 &= (a_{41}, a_{42}, a_{43}, a_{44}, a_{45}, \dots ) \\
s_5 &= (a_{51}, a_{52}, a_{53}, a_{54}, a_{55}, \dots ) \\
&\vdots
\end{align*}$$
where $a_{ij} \in \{0, 1\}$.

Construct a new sequence $b = (b_1, b_2, b_3, \dots)$ by setting
$$b_n = 1 - a_{nn} \quad \forall \, n \in \mathbb{N}.$$

That is, $b_n$ is the opposite of the diagonal entry $a_{nn}$. Clearly $b$ is an element of $S$, since each $b_n$ is either $0$ or $1$.

Now suppose that $b$ appears in the enumeration, say $b = s_k$ for some $k \in \mathbb{N}$. Then, looking at the $k$-th coordinate, we have $b_{k} = a_{kk}$. And notice that if $a_{kk} = 0$ then $b_k = 1$ and if $a_{kk} = 1$ then $b_k = 0$. Hence, $b_k = a_{kk}$, is impossible. Therefore $b$ cannot be equal to any $s_k$; i.e., $b$ is not in the list.

This contradicts our assumption that the list contained every sequence in $S$. Hence $S$ cannot be countable; it is uncountable.

---
